have you ever done this recommended a
product to someone only for them to come
back and tell you the whole thing was a
nightmare it is the worst feeling it's
even worse when you recommended that
same product to I don't know a few
million other people so when this email
hit my inbox I was freaking out not only
does buddy say he's got a broken laptop
which I mean that happens from time to
time DOA happens but then he goes into
his awful experience with framework
customer support now my Instinct was to
run to my computer and send an email to
the CEO demanding that he help this
customer but then I thought if one
person is having this problem there
could be hundreds or even thousands and
if something's rotten over at framework
putting a Band-Aid on this one complaint
isn't going to solve it so I took
matters into my own hands or rather
someone else's hands deploying a crack
team to go undercover and secret shop
framework and spoiler alert things
didn't get off to a perfect start with
one of our two machines arriving with a
factory defect which I guess is good
because it gives us an opportunity to
put their customer service to the test
the stakes really couldn't be higher
here as some of you may remember from my
investment disclosure I said that if
framework doesn't uphold the promises
and commitments they made to me and our
community my breakup with them will be
swift absolute and in public you might
also remember in that video I segued to
our sponsor really Bridge who's coming
at you with something totally different
a soft wallet it's a double-sided
leather wallet designed to hold both
your cards and your cash and you can
check it out using our Link in the video
description let's start this off by
taking a closer look at the email that
kicked off this whole
investigation after Seth received his
DIY framework 13 and installed his own
Ramen SSD he was having issues getting
it to post he reached out to support and
was frustrated to say the least when it
took 7 days to receive a response that
wasn't automated and adding insult to
injury they asked him to try
troubleshooting steps that he already
said he tried first thought then 7 days
is a really long time to sit there with
a fancy new not to mention expensive
paper weight but hopefully it's an
outlier to find out we attempted to
recreate his situation by ordering the
exact same laptop opting to bring our
own RAM and SSD but since one laptop
it's not very large sample size we
decided to double it placing a separate
order several months later for a
pre-built framework 16 fulfillment for
both of them was what I would describe
as solid we ordered the DIY 13 way back
in March 6 days later landed on our
doorstep not bad considering it came
from the other side of the world as for
the framework 16 same story except in
July and and it arrived on a different
doorstep we wanted to make sure that if
we had to open support tickets for both
machines that they would not be coming
from the same person or from the same
address now we'll get to support in a
bit but first one of framework's main
attractions is that they provide
resources that assist the user with
repairs and the maintenance of their
device so rather than just have me build
the DIY Edition again we recruited
Natalie from our LT store team she knows
enough about tech to be interested in it
but hasn't spent literal days with her
head inside a computer let's see how she
did all right what is this cool okay oh
wow stickers it's actually pretty
enjoyable watching People's you know
real not overblown YouTuber reaction
whoa stickers wow I kep this is what a
normal person looks like when they're
reacting to stickers you can tell she's
being like super careful with everything
yeah but that's the way that a real
customer would be people often get after
me about the way that I'm like yeah I
don't know yeah someone else will pick
up these boxes a lot of the time it is
me after the shoe but yeah I like the I
like the quick Pace you know 100%
whereas she likes to work in computer at
the end all right packaging is not that
great to open oh sick burn on the
packaging I do like this paper very I
don't know how protective it is but it's
very nice and clean I gave her basically
nothing going into this cool I told her
that your bu building a laptop you can
use as many guides as you would like
which is from Frameworks website that's
pretty cool so this is representative of
pretty much a worst case scenario in
terms of how informed she would be
because if she had actually placed the
order herself she would have maybe read
the product page but she's going in even
fresher yeah which is important to keep
in mind she's under a lot of pressure
doing something brand new for her and
something she's never done and trying to
be camera presentable um so please like
the video and leave a nice comment for
Natalie cuz she did great in all honesty
yeah she's our
Prince she's going in
fresh oh Bel
Air all right set up upgrade and repair
guides view all guides so they had a QR
code that she was able to scan start
with step one yes unbox your framework
laptop don't power it on just yet you'll
need to install some modules I will open
it from the packaging first then
framework laptop wow
so excited Natalie locate the framework
screwdriver in the package underneath
yep so only the only tool you'll need to
assemble the framework laptop DIY
Edition okay let's see if that's true
that is pretty cool that you only need
one tool to build it and they give it to
you and this is actually where I noticed
the first issue with Frameworks guides
here oh it had the QR code in the box
and it's she scanned it and it took her
to that website there it didn't take her
to the direct link for her specific
skew I think that's something they could
improve yes so she has the AMD version
yes step four insert the ddr5 memory
module so we lift open the flap there's
two slots it's cool that they have
videos in the guide not just pictures
that's sick according to the video and
one thing I did confirm is the QR codes
on the individual items themselves do
take you to like those specific uh
instructions so for the Ram or whatever
right so everything else was right
except the very first one which is the
one that they shove in your face when
you open it oh there we go first Ram
stick doesn't look like she got it in
quite a little more in might help I do
think that video could be better I think
they could show that you have to like
slide it in a little harder one thing I
think that's tough about the video too
is that like overlay of like the back 10
forward 10 and play stays open in that
tiny window and it darkens the whole
screen so it's like a little annoying
you can see her several times she tries
to like tap away so that it like goes
away and then there's the click okay she
gets it yep nice using the T5 bit in the
frame or I need my handy
tool unscrew the Fastener she works for
Creator Warehouse Natalie you can say
screwdriver it's not a competing product
yet do you think that screwdriver is
better than LT stores how dare you H LT
screwdriver all the way yeah she knows
what's up I was just asking you she
knows what's up it was a non-biased
question traiter I speaking of bias
actually this is probably a good time to
ask like how I can evaluate something
like framework when I've invested in
them oh uh how can you fairly evaluate
something like framework when you have
invested in them Elijah what's your
problem you managed the project you know
that I didn't do anything but Greenlight
it and
film it well and add this super awkward
interaction this is a really awkward way
of telling them yeah I I added this part
I thought it was funny that is not
magnetic and I have to hold the screw in
yeah what what is this Throwing
Shade all right step five done go take
that framework I would honestly call
those like the easiest steps of a laptop
cuz you can do that with even some
pre-builts already well the challenge is
getting that thing open sure in a lot of
cases yeah it's really easy when it's
easy to open up the machine mhm install
the touchpad cable assuming
it's this gestures of well the picture
the picture doesn't really match that's
a really good point make sure the
touchpad side of the touchpad cable is
fully inserted here so this is one of
those things where it it comes inserted
already but they actually give a step
eight just in case right make sure you
double check this yeah it would be nice
if they said it is pre-attached yeah but
it could come loose in shipping tell me
why yeah so yeah it does say in the red
there the cable should be inserted far
enough yeah but it doesn't say why I'm
checking it yeah like occasionally these
come loosen shipping due to thermal
expansion and contract like tell me why
I'm doing something yeah educate me
there you go nice good job Natalie uh
align the corners of the bezel to
display and place it down the bezel is
attached by magnets and should easily
click into
Place sometimes sometimes the display
cable can kind of not cable manage
perfectly oh no that's going to happen
isn't it you're going to find out very
quickly here oh
good doesn't not sound
great oh she didn't screw on the top yet
no she wasn't supposed to the
instructions did not tell her to screw
on the top the instructions ask to open
the hinge 180
and put the bezel on she followed that
yeah so she didn't have it quite aligned
yet yep let's try this one again so you
can kind of see some of those cables
there y by Magnus okay was that is
something that framework could improve
yep it would be nice if they had
pictures of what correctly seated cables
looked like yes because I've actually
run into it before where I routed it
across the wrong thing and that made it
worse not better mhm so she's now like
double cheing everything she's like
worried about her input cover she was
worried about all of this interesting
there's a lot of comments on these do
the comments outline some of the issues
that we've encountered already there was
someone in the comments that help that
would have helped solve this issue that
crunching we'll find out in a little bit
was actually due to how the um screws
because they're captive fell underneath
the laptop and the hinge catches it when
it tries to close got it and so it's the
bezel related because you have to lay it
down for the bezel yeah but it's caught
on the screws yeah but the comments are
not that obvious yeah she even mentioned
she's like do I have to go in the
comments I go to the comments there's no
way I go to the comments there's no way
you have to go to the comist for
instructions there's no way I have to go
to the com oh Natalie so she doesn't so
she doesn't she doesn't framework needs
to go into those comments mine for
nuggets of gold yeah and get them oh
this wasn't back when I had my horrible
haircut oh God man that's gross why' you
show that on camera her
infection what it was just her there now
she's got a staff
infection so you can see the screw there
caught on the hinge that's what I had to
do I had to turn it upside down so the
gravity took the Fasteners back down
yeah then I could close it yep and no
Crunch and then this is where I tell her
in the comments someone points out that
the Fasteners will get in the way yeah
so this is actually where now it tells
you to keep going and screw the
Fasteners back in I think this step
should honestly come first but they
don't want the screen to be closed
because without the bezel you know it
doesn't add all the protection and
everything right that is a big wall of
text for the expansion cards but I
understand why I didn't even know this
when I did my unboxing but the AMD
version specifically has certain modules
that work best in C certain spots MH
modular IO it's pretty cool it's kind of
cool it's pretty sick open the lid and
press the power button all right this is
the Moment of Truth here we go where's
my top down view there we go note that
your first boot will take a while before
the logo that's a really good thing for
them to point out especially modern AMD
platforms they take a hot minute for
memory training on the first Boot and
there you go there we go there's some
intricate parts that are a little bit
difficult to kind of grasp at first
obviously with the the screw issue we
didn't know until we looked at the
comments um but overall like it's kind
of it's a pretty fun experience building
your own laptop do you think that you
would save the personal between $100 to
$200 to do this experience again this is
the moment of truth I think so yes she
think so yes even after some struggles
it's worth the savings for a hundred
bucks a couple hundred bucks off the
laptop the more of a Savvy Shopper you
are on your RAM and on your storage
the more you can potentially save
because I got to tell you when we did
the framework factory tour and I
discovered that the DIY ones actually
get fully assembled into a working
machine before being taken back apart
yeah and then sold as a DIY it's not
labor savings yeah it's not paying a
markup on those additional components
100% the touch pad's working perfect
that's good oh okay this is the camera
and this is the audio that you're
hearing from this framework laptop mic
so hopefully everything sounds good
sounds good Natalie good job Natalie
thank you she put the stickers on nice
cool this is actually pretty symmetrical
the
stickers I'm very proud of that I mean
I'm pretty proud of the laptop too I'm
definitely including that editor make
sure that Parts in there at the end so
after this we did a full check just to
make sure everything did fully work and
it arrived to us in 100% working
condition excellent
mhm which means that if we want to
recreate Seth's issue we're going to
have to do some work he said his display
wasn't turning on and the LEDs inside
his chassis were giving him three
different error codes but we couldn't
find any reference to any of those codes
on framework's website so either
framework hasn't published them yet or
it's possible Seth misinterpreted them
either way we won't be able to recreate
his exact situation that he had the
closest thing that I could come up
with I took a knife to the display cable
and cut it until it didn't turn on
anymore it worked or did didn't work and
then meanwhile we asked Alex to unbox
the 16 look at his face that's a man who
laptops he does laptop he seriously
laptops okay this is their config which
explains why we're able to get it in a
week which is absolutely fantastic
that's about what you expect and
especially given it's Canada went right
into hosting mode I just asked him to
open it and check it he was like hosting
I was like this is great this great it's
almost like he's been doing it for seven
years I think so wait we wanted a
pre-built config here
this should have been pre-built I'm not
sure why did we order a pre-built so
this is where it gets confusing because
we ordered a pre-built and as someone
who never ordered a framework before I
expected it to come 100% built but
because the framework 16 has the modular
interface on top they make you put that
together yes to make you know how to
reconfigure it but as a user I was very
confused when I saw the keyboard on top
I was like huh do they mess up our order
it does appear that it has everything
that you need minus the iio but does it
have a keyboard it does not it does not
that's something that I normally expect
on my
laptops are you supposed to have a
keyboard installed in the pre-built
no man that's so cool that's still one
of the like ah it's pretty cool it's
sick the one we're watching on right now
has a numpad installed so the keyboard
is shifted to the side and the spacers
are both on the right you get to choose
if your trackpad is centered here or
centered on your space bar when you have
the numad over here that's a really nice
little bit of customization that you can
do we have confirmed that our pre-built
is supposed to come without the keyboard
installed that's a little bit
questionable in my mind but at the same
time if you're buying a framework and
not planning on configuring it just
don't buy a framework buy any other
laptop that's not repairable that is a
fair statement as well that's a fair
statement yeah yep the sales pitch for
framework is the repairability the
upgradeability the customizability if
you aren't even willing to just put the
magnetic keyboard on and it attaches
real easy so like it probably isn't the
machine for you yeah and that's okay
audio is a requirement I don't even know
why this is a dongle they should just
have it attached to the machine another
fair I think criticism I agree with that
they gave it to us on the third and then
took it away on the 16 ooh we've got
ethernet oh look at how fancy it looks
it's right see-through oh never mind I
don't like that as much anymore it does
not fit within the
chassis I actually I I have a bone to
pick I don't like that because me being
stupid I will drop it in my bag and one
day I will go with that end first and I
will destroy it it should have been
flush the way that I think of it it's a
Wi-Fi for first device like many other
mobile devices this is a great little
USBC 2 1/2 gig dongle that's pretty cool
at a good price very compact compatible
with anything totally understand the
critique it will not break off easily
though thank you for destroying our
capture oh [__] so the ethernet doesn't
break very well but it break the Other M
oh shoot the system locked up hold on
hold on we'll we'll we'll turn it back
on we're just going to shut it down and
turn it back on did I break the computer
can you just make sure this still
works
hey thank goodness and your 2 and half
gigs still works as well nice anyway the
point is that if you do put it in your
bag with this thing in is it the most
elegant thing ever absolutely not I wish
they had one of the little hingi style
ones or something um but will it like
immediately break no you just might have
to reboot your computer all right it's
now plugged in let's try turning it on
again yay input module connector board
not detected
uhoh uh is that supposed to be installed
for a pre-built the input module
connector board yes neat so he goes and
double checks it just needed a little
click it's possible during shipping 30
seconds for someone who is so far above
the average in terms of their technical
knowledge and experience with laptops
like Alex is the 1% yeah if something
takes him 30 seconds it's going to take
my mom 30 minutes to figure out for
laptop repair my mom's good at lots of
things yep Graphics all fantastic it
appears that framework has done
everything correctly finally let's just
confirm that the webcam is working also
is this
microphone okay the microphone switch
Works yep as far as a laptop has arrived
correctly this one passes so then that
seems like a w well Alex didn't quite
check everything unfortunately there was
actually an issue with our numpad in the
top left region the top left region of
the numpad what does that even mean it
was several keys and it was inconsistent
oo so we tried reating the module on
both sides we tried taking it out doing
a whole bunch of configuration and
ultimately we couldn't get it working
even after updating Windows drivers and
bios um so we had to open another
support ticket and hand off to Elijah to
give you the results from the DIY
13 I opened the ticket explaining what
my issue was as well as some basic
troubleshooting steps that I had already
taken the idea here was to see that if
they would ask me to repeat my work just
like they did with Seth 24 hours later
framework responded with some follow-up
steps and questions to help figure this
problem out further after answering them
and Responding back to those questions
54 minutes later they followed up one
more time I was honestly pretty
impressed that they got back to me so
quickly and then we ran into the same
issue Seth was having they did ask me to
repeat a step that I had told them I did
in my first email and as an end user
that's really frustrating to have to
repeat yourself but as someone who did
work in tech support helping people fix
their Tech issues in the past I can't
count the number of times that I have
asked someone to reboot a computer that
they said they have only to check their
task manager and see that it's been up
for 3 years in my personal opinion I
think them asking me to try that is
totally fine especially since this is
their first time asking me to try it but
if we dive deeper into set case a little
bit later you'll see that's not what
happened to him for my machine here I
had one more back and forth session and
then framework came to the conclusion
that we needed a new Display Kit and if
you remove the days I was on vacation
and the weekends where I wasn't working
it took the framework support team three
days to reach that result which is
honestly pretty solid my new Display Kit
arrived in 6 days and as you can see it
works it took about 15 minutes to swap
it out using Frameworks guide that they
both emailed us in that support chain
and then included in the box with the
screen repairable laptops for the win
that's awesome as for our framework
16 that's where everything falls
apart they killed it again who who am I
kidding if you take out the weekends
where I wasn't able to respond it took
them 4 days to diagnose that numpad
issue I was asked to send back the old
one and they did Cover the shipping I
just had to throw it in a box and send
it on its way at no point was I
frustrated or upset with the framework
support team and I'm confident in saying
that they had no idea who we were since
both devices were purchased using burner
emails on credit cards that were not
associated with an employee here but
framework doesn't come out of our
investigation looking perfect I'm going
to throw it back to lonus so we can hear
the rest of Seth's experience
he spent almost three weeks chatting
with support during which they did send
him a motherboard as a troubleshooting
step but then after the swap Seth was
still having the same issue like kijah
pointed out asking the user to try
something once that's fine even if the
end user does say they already did it
but in this email chain we can see that
framework asked him not once but twice
to try external displays and not once
but four times to try different
combinations of shuffling Ram around I
think that would make just about anyone
feel like they're getting the runaround
especially if this is happening over the
course of a month now he did say some
kind words to framework in the final
email expressing that he believes in
their mission to create more sustainable
and repairable devices but that given
the laptop was for his wife's schooling
he couldn't wait around forever for a
working device I don't blame him for
asking for a refund so what's the
takeaway then for you guys it's what we
always say you should be looking for
multiple sources of information every
time multiple media Outlets consumer
reviews to get the whole picture of a
product or company you are going to have
to go out there and dig for it as for
framework well hey the good news for you
guys is that while you do make mistakes
it seems like the impression even from
people who have a bad experience is that
you guys actually care and that's a
badge that you can wear with honor that
doesn't mean that there's no room to
improve but hey at least you guys
recognize it this Reddit thread actually
popped up while we were working on this
video with Buddy buying 150 devices to
deploy and then realizing that every
time they opened a support ticket they
were going to have to go through this
same tedious Back in Forth email
experience I mean for an end user
snapping some pictures and communicating
over a couple of days might not be the
end of the world but if you're going
through that kind of rigar roll with a
fleet of devices you're going to be
tearing your hair out thankfully though
the op made a follow-up thread
explaining that because of his feedback
framework is actually expanding and
changing some of their systems around
their business to business sales model
meaning that other companies should have
an easier time buying and taking care of
a large number of their devices they
even ended it with saying they sincerely
give a that is very encouraging and
while I'm not going to give them a grade
because I don't think you can boil this
down to just a letter or a
number I think it's safe to say that I'm
still on board and actually whether he
knows it yet or not so is Seth I
realized Seth you probably have another
laptop by now but I would like to offer
you as a show of our appreciation for
bringing this issue to our attention
Elijah's handf fixed framework 13 so hey
thank you very much and as for the rest
of you let us know in the comments if
you've had any experiences with
framework that you guys would like to
share and while you're down there hey
maybe check out our sponsor delete me
send me alarms your personal information
may be sold online without you even
knowing it and you know what's scarier
when someone buys your data via a data
broker they might also have access to
information about your family that's
where delete me comes in they help
remove your data from hundreds of data
broker websites plus with their family
plans you can easily add your loved ones
ensuring personalized protection for
each and every one of them their privacy
first design means each family member
gets their own data sheet keeping their
online footprints secure and with
simplified management overseeing your
family's privacy has never been easier
so take control of your data and reduce
the risk of exposure to spam and scams
by checking out delete me and if you use
our Link in the description you can get
20% off at checkout with code
lt2 if you guys enjoyed this video maybe
go check out the first time that we
unboxed a framework laptop that was what
inspired me to invest in this company
and so far his investment is safe I'm
glad I did